{"key":"articles","value":{"Pale Dīan’s Narrow Birth is Shoegaze Nostalgia Done Right":{"title":"Pale Dīan’s Narrow Birth is Shoegaze Nostalgia Done Right","author":"Bram Howard","content":"Admittedly, I don’t have a comprehensive familiarity with every pocket of musical culture in Austin, but in my limited travels I’ve found that, with a few very notable exceptions like Letting Up Despite Great Faults or Ringo Deathstarr, local dreamy shoegaze tends to be somewhat limited. We have our share of electronic clubs and goth scenes to fill that echo-y void, but sometimes you just want some hazy pop to drift along to. Recently, though, I was introduced to a band by the name of Pale Dīan, and am thoroughly pleased to report that they pick this banner up and carry it effortlessly and with pride.\n\nPale Dīan has been a band since 2015, but are just now releasing their debut full length, Narrow Birth. The trio– consisting of Ruth Ellen, DK, and Nicholas Volpe– released Narrow Birth in June, and absolutely destroy at everything they set out to achieve with the album. With equal parts Cocteau Twins and the Cure, and maybe a bit of dark and new wave sprinkled in for good measure, Narrow Birth captures almost everything that a guy like me enjoys about the ‘80s and early ‘90s.\n\nEverything you hear on this album mostly centers on a rigid, ticking, electro format, but has an effortless flow to it, like the airy glides of classic shoegaze.  This and resonating synth tones mixed with swelling guitars that buzz and bend in loud, dissonant pop melodies, encompasses the Pale Dīan style. “Evan Evan,” probably the most representative of this, and incidentally my favorite track off the album, is phrased around an eerie synth melody that just sticks with you long after the track is over. The synth rides on a simple, almost post-punk drum beat while guitars roar around it. You’ll hear these warped tones that are so subtle, but sound absolutely beautiful, before an explosion of bent distortion creates an amorphous noise pop blob. It’s fantastic.\n\nSongs like “In a Day” take a page out of the Cocteau Twins book, showing off Ruth Ellens’s vocal abilities, further nodding towards a large feature of the dream pop pioneers. The song prominently features a swaying bass melody that dances with the six beat timing of the drums, all while guitars reverberate across the aural space, fluttering in that classic, dreamy tone. Ellens’s voice goes from breathy, mid-range cooing to high, borderline strained, but always beautiful, chants that channel Elizabeth Fraser’s ethereal “tribe of the clouds” style. It’s an impressive delivery that has always been a focal point for bands like this.\n\nThe darker side of Narrow Birth exists on this plane between goth and synth pop where everything is wilted and eery, but still so danceable and catchy. When you listen to “Feral Bloom”, you’re immediately met with a sinister and angry drone that dissonantly grits its teeth as pounding, darkwave-esque drums march behind it. Ellens laments over the dreariness, seeming to plead with her veiled vocals, creating a gloomy delicacy that I love. The song then picks up to form a groovy dance jam that’s backed by icy synth tones, creating a perfect blend of movement and emotion.\n\nWhat you get beyond this is a very contemporary vibe that we hear with a lot of “nu” bands these days (“nu-gaze”, “nu-wave”, etc., etc.). While not altogether “new”, these styles are still quite welcome, and Pale Dīan fabricates them in their own unique way that still sits quite well with the listener. “Lonesome Waste” has that twee-meets-electro combo that I originally heard with Blouse, and “The Avenue” and “Mimi’s Magnolia” remind me of a much more grandiose Beach House with their twinkling synths, somber tone, and steady tempoes– a fitting parallel to Pale Dīan’s ‘80s salute.\n\nPale Dīan achieve what so many bands, with their respective ‘80s and ‘90s musical nostalgia, try to do right now. They basically perfect what it means to blend genres, and set a tone that is so appropriate for these styles of music that I can’t believe I’m not listening to something from thirty years ago. Narrow Birth is a fantastic listen, and one worth anyone’s time. Pale Dīan are now an essential Austin group for me, and have earned their place, with their droned-out fuzz, sparkling synths, and airy vocalizations, alongside their dreamy counterparts."},"Borzoi and Leche’s Split Pagan Moon Proves to be a Bit Schizophrenic":{"title":"Borzoi and Leche’s Split Pagan Moon Proves to be a Bit Schizophrenic","author":"Brian Audette","content":"Punk genre-benders Borzoi are poised to head out on tour with fellow locals Leche this week and to kick-off the whole affair, the duo have dropped a split EP of new off-kilter songs. Now, Leche is not a group I was familiar with before this split, though considering the large number of local acts, even confined to just the more punkish circles, that’s no surprise. Doing a little digging, I uncovered what sounded like a more-or-less proto or early post-hardcore punk band in Leche: bold, brash, and just a little crusty around the edges. Borzoi, on the other hand, I’ve covered before, and they seem to excel at not being pinned down. Sometimes hardcore, sometimes classic punk, sometimes straight up rock-and-roll, the one constant for Borzoi seems to be no constant at all. Together on Pagan Moon both acts seem to have taken on a swampy, hillbilly lilt, producing several tracks of hazy, hot, and humid music straight-out of the bayou or the holler.\n\nThe 8-song EP opens with the instrumental “Mountain Surrender,” a jumbled back porch banjo affair that does a pretty good job of setting the mood for what’s to come. Leche lead us off after that with “Carl’s Bangin’ Snake Juice,” a moonshiner’s parable about stickin’ it to the man, full of psychobilly speed and twang. Opening with the slow drawl of a fuzzed out guitar in the midst of being tuned down, the track quickly picks up speed as the drums and vocals kick in, telling the tale of a fed on the prowl and Carl’s deadly spiked ‘shine.\n\nBorzoi’s “Yeti” shows up next, a messy affair with super stripped down guitars, psychotic vocals, and frantically brilliant drumming. It’s a fun if not ultimately forgettable track. Leche return next with “No Snow, No Show” a rock-and-roll drug anthem played at the break neck pace of early California hardcore. Following that is the split’s longest track. Clocking in at around five minutes, Borzoi’s “Nice” is next on the rotation. Similar to “Yeti” before it, the song is anchored by bare bones guitars and solid drumming, though towards the end it takes on an almost 70’s lounge flavor. The most “artsy” track on this EP, “Nice” feels like the composition notebook ramblings of a psychopath stalker put to music. The result is unsettling, but almost beautifully so.\n\nLeche’s “Stop Resisting” is another classic sounding hardcore track: short, fast, and full of complaints about overbearing cops. On “Fire Sermon” Borzoi again shift shapes, this time bringing some southern twang on guitar and bar room reverb on the vocals. Lyrically we’re back down in the holler with fire and brimstone preachers, gallows ropes, and bumpkin bigotry, all of which the narrator summarily rejects while spitting square in its eye. The album closes on “Unease/Ship” an angular, angst-filled piece fretting over college and kids, an odd and yet fitting outro to a bizarre collection of songs.\n\nAs a whole, Pagan Moon is a schizophrenic sum of its parts, filled with hardcore, hillbilly nightmare stalker diaries, drugs, and existential dread. The recordings vary in quality, several tracks sounding like they were lifted off a boombox, transferred to vinyl, and then re-recorded. Other tracks are surprisingly crisp by comparison, but overall the split definitely sports a stripped-down early punk ethos and along with it a complete lack of fucks given about what anyone might think about that. While I’m sure fans of both Leche and Borzoi will get a kick out of this split, its primary audience may just be the bands themselves. At best I can say that the split did grow on me after a couple listens. At worst it’s something new on the merch table for the coming tour and hell… better to record and release than to have never recorded at all."},"Baby Dinosaur's 99 Million-Year-Old Tail, Encased In Amber, Surfaces In Myanmar":{"title":"Baby Dinosaur's 99 Million-Year-Old Tail, Encased In Amber, Surfaces In Myanmar","author":"Rae Ellen Bichell","content":"In 2015, Lida Xing was visiting a market in northern Myanmar when a salesman brought out a piece of amber about the size of a pink rubber eraser. Inside, he could see a couple of ancient ants and a fuzzy brown tuft that the salesman said was a plant.\n\nAs soon as Xing saw it, he knew it wasn't a plant. It was the delicate, feathered tail of a tiny dinosaur.\n\n\"I have studied paleontology for more than 10 years and have been interested in dinosaurs for more than 30 years. But I never expected we could find a dinosaur in amber. This may be the coolest find in my life,\" says Xing, a paleontologist at China University of Geosciences in Beijing. \"The feathers on the tail are so dense and regular, this is really wonderful.\"\n\nHe persuaded the Dexu Institute of Palaeontology to buy the artifact.\n\nAfter analyzing the delicate tail, Xing and his colleagues in China, the U.K. and Canada now have an idea of what type of dinosaur it is, and of the evolutionary clues it holds. Their research was published Thursday in the journal Current Biology.\n\nThey say that 99 million years ago, a baby dinosaur about the size of a sparrow got stuck in tree resin and never made it out. Had the young dinosaur had a more auspicious day, it would have grown up to be a little smaller than an ostrich.\n\nThe young coelurosaur, nicknamed \"Eva,\" is closely related to iconic meat-eaters Tyrannosaurus rex and Velociraptor, which chases the kids around the kitchen in Jurassic Park.\n\n\"A lot of baby birds look kinda creepy, to be honest. This one was probably fairly cute and fuzzy. Not your terror-of-Jurassic-Park type,\" says Ryan McKellar, curator of invertebrate paleontology at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum in Canada and a co-author on the paper.\n\nThe tail's dense feathers spread off to the sides, making it look flat. Vertebrae the size of grains of rice allowed the animal to swing it around (the curving tail was a major tip-off for Xing that this was no bird; the vertebrae of modern birds are fused into a rod). \"So it's a tiny, whip-like tail,\" says McKellar.\n\nIt's rare to find fossil feathers attached to the spine they came from, which is what allows paleontologists to pin them firmly on the evolutionary tree.\n\n\"It's a spectacular little glimpse,\" McKellar says. \"It gives us, basically, a pathway that gets us to modern feathers.\" And the story of how feathers evolved has been an area of debate for some time now.\n\nBird feathers today have a strong central shaft — the part you'd dip in ink if you were using a quill. Little branches stem from that shaft, and even tinier branches stem from those, acting as hooks that zip the feather together into one smooth, continuous surface that's important for flight.\n\nBefore the advent of the strong shaft and hook-like barbules, flight wouldn't have been possible.\n\nDid feathers start out stiff and spiky, with the strong shaft coming first, then the branches and then the smaller branches? Or did feathers start out floppy and fluffy, with barbs and barbules, and develop the strong central shaft later?\n\nThe little creature in amber points to the floppy scenario.\n\n\"It has those really fine branches, which potentially suggests the barbules evolved earlier than we thought,\" says Jakob Vinther, a paleobiologist at Bristol University in the U.K. who was not involved in the study.\n\n\"And that actually becomes really interesting in the evolution of color,\" he says.\n\nAnytime you see a bird with iridescent feathers, such as a hummingbird or peacock, it's the barbules that are responsible for the brilliant, color-shifting effect. So when dinosaurs and birds evolved barbules, they unlocked a palette of brilliant colors.\n\nEarlier fossils suggest that feathers developed first for insulation. Then, one line of thinking goes, they developed for flight and then later for display — like showing off fancy colors to attract mates, or muted tones to camouflage.\n\n\"I think the fact that the finest branches, which could have harbored this bright iridescence, got established before we got very robust feathers — that could potentially lean toward this idea that feathers were mainly used to show off before they got used to fly with,\" Vinther says.\n\n\"The fact that barbules might have originated earlier clearly show that some of these very bright colors, like this metallic iridescence, could have originated earlier,\" he adds. \"Perhaps a greater number of dinosaurs, and more primitive dinosaurs, could have been iridescent.\"\n\nAnd that means that feathered dinosaurs — even ones way back in evolutionary history — might have pranced around looking quite flamboyant.\n\n\"I'm really looking forward to see what's gonna be unearthed [in Myanmar] in the future,\" Vinther says. \"It's really exciting what we get out of these amber fossils.\"\n\nIn fact, Xing has already been back to Myanmar.\n\n\"The conflict between government forces and local armed forces is nearing an end. Soon, there will be a lot of specimens excavated,\" says Xing, who has been visiting amber markets in Myanmar's tumultuous Kachin state for a few years now.\n\nIn his dream of dreams, Xing says, he hopes to find a whole dinosaur encased in amber."},"Gene Editing Tool Hailed As A Breakthrough, And It Really Is One":{"title":"Gene Editing Tool Hailed As A Breakthrough, And It Really Is One","author":"Joe Palca","content":"Every once in a while a technology comes along that completely alters the way scientists do their work.\n\nIt's hard to imagine astronomy without a telescope or high energy physics without an accelerator.\n\nFrom here on in, it's going to be impossible to imagine biology without CRISPR-Cas9.\n\nSimply put, CRISPR-Cas9 allows scientists to make specific changes to specific genes in living cells. Such a thing was possible in the past using technques called zinc finger nucleases and Talens. But those techniques were cumbersome and weren't widely adopted.\n\nIn the three short years since the first scientific papers appeared about CRISPR-Cas9, the technique has been \"spreading like wildfire,\" says Ramesh Akkina, a molecular immunologist at Colorado State University.\n\nAnd for 2015, the journal Science called CRISPR the \"breakthrough of the year.\"\n\nThere have been lots of ethical debates about what the new gene editing technique could do, such as creating designer babies or making mutant species. But most biologists aren't interested in making designer babies or mutant species. They just want to understand basic things like how the cells in our bodies work, or how certain genes function. They expect CRISPR-Cas 9 to be very, very helpful with those lines of inquiry.\n\nRecently I visited Colorado State University to give a talk, but I realized it would be a great place to assess just how far and wide CRISPR-Cas9 had spread.\n\nFirst, I talked with Christopher Allen, a scientist in the environmental and radiological health sciences department who studies the genes that are important for repairing DNA inside our cells.\n\nWhen that repair process goes wrong, the result can be cancer. So Allen would like to be able to compare cells side by side: one that has a gene he thinks is important in the repair process, and one that is missing that gene. To do that, he has to modify the genome of a cell, something CRISPR-Cas9 will let him do easily.\n\nAnother scientist, Carol Wilusz, studies how and when genes are expressed in stem cells. She says CRISPR-Cas9 is going to make a difference in her work, \"because it's going to enable us to do experiments that we've been struggling to do through other approaches.\"\n\nNow, Wilusz and Allen aren't trying to cure diseases, at least not directly, but CRISPR might be useful for that, too.\n\n\"The work we're doing now is to use CRISPR-Cas technology to delete HIV genome from infected cells, such that the cell can be cured completely,\" says Ramesh Akkina, a virologist at Colorado State. Right now he is perfecting that trick in cells in the lab, but he is working on a scheme to do it in patients as well.\n\nCRISPR-Cas9 isn't just useful for working organisms in the animal kingdom. It's useful in forests and fields.\n\n\"I study diseases of plants,\" says plant geneticist Jan Leach, \"and my goal is to try to make plants that are resistant to different pathogens.\"\n\nShe says there are a host of genes inside plant cells that turn on when the plant tries to fight invasion from bacteria or fungi. She'd like to be able modify all of them. With CRISPR-Cas9, she can.\n\n\"I've been working in this particular area for over 20 years, and in 20 years I've been able to do one or two genes,\" says Allen. \"With CRISPR-Cas I'll be able to do 20 or 30.\"\n\nIn two days, I spoke with nine different researchers. I asked them all the same question. \"Will CRISPR-Cas9 have an impact on your work?\"\n\nHonestly, it's stunning to witness the impact CRISPR-Cas9 has had on biology. It ranks with the most important tools invented in the past century. I wouldn't be surprised if it wins Science magazine's breakthrough of the year next year too."}}}